# camera-placement
Repository for data and script for the manuscript entitled: Species-specific effects of camera-trap placement on detection of members of a mammalian community by Tim R. Hofmeester, Neri H. Thorsen, Joris P. G. M. Cromsigt, Jonas Kindberg, Henrik Andrén, John D. C. Linnell & John Odden 

<b>Abstract</b>
Camera-trapping studies often aim at elusive species such as large carnivores, and camera-trap placement is then optimized to detect these target species. As these cameras can detect any animal that passes, these studies generate large amounts of by-catch data on non-target species. Such data is increasingly used to study ecological questions related to community structure and predator-prey interactions. However, differences in species movement ecology, habitat use, and interspecific avoidance / attraction could potentially bias inference of community level parameters obtained from a large-carnivore centric study design. We used data from a permanent camera-trapping grid (with 38 cameras) targeted at monitoring Eurasian lynx (Lynx lynx) in Innlandet County, Norway, and paired randomly placed cameras at two spatial scales (38 cameras within the same habitat patch and 38 cameras within the same landscape as the lynx-targeted cameras) for three months. We used hierarchical Bayesian multi-scale occupancy models that enable the separation of large-scale occupancy, camera-scale site use and detection probability to study the effect of camera placement on detections of ten medium-sized to large mammal species at different spatial scales from the microsite to the landscape. The probability of site use was highest at the lynx-targeted camera sites for all species, with the largest differences between placement types for red fox (Vulpes vulpes) and roe deer (Capreolus capreolus), while mountain hare (Lepus timidus) showed hardly any difference between placement types. Overall, the type of microsite where a camera was placed (i.e., microsite-scale) seemed to have the greatest effect on species detection. However, species differed in the scale at which factors most influenced detection. For example, detection of Eurasian badgers (Meles meles) was only associated with landscape-scale covariates, while detection of wolverine (Gulo gulo) was only associated with camera-scale covariates. We conclude that by-catch data from camera trapping studies aimed at large carnivores can be used to study mammal community structure, but that the type of microsite at which cameras are placed needs to be taken into account, correcting for potential biases where possible.

<b>Data</b>

The MSocc- files contain the detection history and covariate data as used in the manuscript.

The R-script contains the description of the model and code to run the model using the different MSocc- files.
